# Notes

- Stackelberg Game
- Stuxnet
- Talinn Manual

# Possible Questions

- Do cyber attacks constitute force? {meulenbelt2012worm}
- How should international law regulate cyber activity? 
{meulenbelt2012worm}
- How does it affect the principle of non-intervention? 
{meulenbelt2012worm}
- In the absence of specific legal principles, can due diligence act 
as an appropriate framework? {meulenbelt2012worm}
- When is cyber war really war in the sense of 'armed conflict’? 
{droege2012get}
- At what point does a cyber attack become an act of war? 
{pagallo2015cyber}
- Can cyber attacks be regardedas an unlawful use of force according 
to Article 2(4) of the United Nations (UN)Charter? {buchan2012cyber}

# {klien2017you}

- There is a growing consensus in the literature on the applicability 
of thejusadbellumto cyber-attacks that the effects caused by an attack 
should determinewhether the attack constitutes a use of force (Article 
2(4) of the UN Charter) oran armed attack giving rise to self-defence 
(Article 51 of the UN Charter) 

- LeadingAmerican officials like Richard Clarke, the then National 
Coordinator for Security Infrastructure Protection and 
Counter-terrorism with the NationalSecurity Council,2and Leo Panetta, 
the former Director of the CIA and atthat time the US Secretary of 
Defence,3have referred to the threat of a‘cyber [or electronic] Pearl 
Harbour’that is looming over the United States.Many states have set up 
cyber divisions within their armed forces, establishingboth offensive 
and defensive capabilities. 

- Obviously, this matter was not a central concern to the creators of 
the UNCharter or of the Geneva Conventions (even though computers and 
compu-ter-aided espionage played a big role in the Second World War), 
so a muchdebated topic at the moment is how cyber-attacks fit into the 
internationallegal framework of warfare 

-  A plethora of articles and a number of bookshave already been 
written on the applicability ofjus ad bellum(the rules onthe legality 
of a war itself),5ofjus in bello(the rules governing conduct in a 
war),6and some articles have been dedicated to the applicability of 
inter-national criminal law to cyber-attacks. 

- While there is a wide range of different articles and books on this 
topic, andwhile these differ in their methodologies and 
argumentations, there appears tobe one consensus in an overwhelming 
majority of them: what matters for thequalification of an attack under 
international law is not so much related towhich methods were used to 
commit it, but what effect was caused by it. For the purposes of this 
article, this view is referred to as the‘effects doctrine’. 


- At first glance, the doctrine seems entirely logical. If a person 
gets hurt bysomeone else, it is ultimately not important to that 
person whether this wasdone by being pushed down a flight of stairs, 
by being intentionally run overwith a car or by being beaten with a 
cricket bat. What matters would indeedbe the effect–the amount of pain 
and the injuries caused. 

- Journalists already warned about the ‘cyber industrial complex’(or 
variations thereof),178and describe an industrythat is valued at 
between 80 and 150 billion dollars annually. 

- The Tallinn Manual isbecoming an extremely influential document in 
international law, as thevarious cyber policies and the statements by 
politicians set out in this article’s introduction show–an influence 
that is only likely to increase with the recentpublication of the more 
extensive 2.0 version. 

# {hollis2018if}

- The U.S. military currently regards cyberspace as a warfighting 
domain, and the U.S. military currently regards cyberspace as a 
warfighting domain,and the United States is one of at least thirty 
countries building a militarycapacity  to  conduct  offensive  
cyberattacks.

- Of  course,  the  appeal  ofcyber operations for states is 
straightforward: they can be deployed to supplement(or even substitute 
for) traditional means and methods of warfare, such as by dis-rupting  
an  adversary’s  command  and  control  networks,  military-related  
criticalinfrastructure, or weapons capabilities.Further, they can be 
used asymmetrically,giving otherwise weaker states opportunities to 
project power. In certain circum-stances, they might even operate 
preemptively as a decisivefirst-strike capability.

- At the same time, cyber operations can also contain escalation or 
provide a con-sistent  means  of  engagement  with  adversaries  that  
falls  short  of  kinetic  armedconflict.

- That said, a few states have expressed anxiety about adopting 
a“military para-digm”for cyberspace.China and Cuba reportedly refused 
to endorse the right ofself-defense and international humanitarian law 
(IHL) in cyberspace out of a con-cern that doing so would legitimize 
military cyber operations.Given China’sownhighly regarded cyber 
forces, its position may be convenient, if not hypocritical,since  it 
is driven by a desire to preserve its room to maneuver and  develop  
itsown capabilities, rather than by a sincere concern about the 
effects that militaryoperations will have on cyberspace.

# {prescott2011war}

- The recent exponential growth in cyber-attacks against the digital 
infrastructure of governments, economies and militaries has 
potentially catastrophic effects.

- The use of cyberspace for unfriendly purposes by often 
unidentifiable actors against military, industrial and governmental 
digital infrastructure has  grown  exponentially  in  recent years.

- The  US Department  of  Defense  (DoD)  has stated  that  its  
computer  systems  are scanned  by  potentially  hostile  actors over 
a million times a day and actually probed over a thousand times daily.

- In discussing  attacks  on  NATO  computer systems, NATO Secretary 
General Anders Fogh  Rasmussen  has  stated:  ‘It’s  no exaggeration 
to say that cyber-attacks have become a new form of permanent, 
low-level warfare’.

- Exploitation of national and international network vulnerabilities 
by malicious actors has the potential for catastrophic effects that 
would ordinarily result only from the use of armed force on a 
significant scale.

-  Not surprisingly, technologically  advanced  militaries and 
civilian governmental agencies are continuing  to  develop  
capabilities  to operate offensively in cyberspace.

- The United States’ assessment is that more than thirty ‘countries 
are creating cyber units  for  their  militaries’.

- Also,  not surprising  given  the  rapidity  of  cyber-technology 
advances, the development of the legal and policy constructs 
consistent with  international  humanitarian  law (IHL), which would 
guide the proper use of  these  capabilities,  appears  to  have 
lagged  behind.

- n  2011,  the  US  released  four documents  that  deal  with  the  
use of  force  in  cyberspace:  the  Obama administration’s  
International  Strategy for  Cyberspace  (hence  International 
Strategy),  published  on  16  May; the  DoD’s  Strategy  for  
Operating  in Cyberspace (DoD Strategy), published on 14 July; a 
report by the US Government Accountability  Office  (GAO),  Defense 
Department Cyber Efforts (Cyber Efforts report), released 26 July; and 
finally, the DoD Cyber Policy Report, made public on 14 November.

- Whilst necessary for national security reasons, classification makes 
the open and critical discussion of IHL’s application to situations 
involving cyberspace  much  more  difficult  than discussing the law’s 
application in the physical  world. 

- Different  nations  have different  IHL  training  programmes  for 
their forces, different capabilities, and different domestic legal and 
policy drivers that govern the way in which the use of armed force is 
actually applied.

- Further, even though they must be consistent with IHL, details of 
the rules of engagement are classified.

- Finally, the means by which force in the geophysical world is 
employed, both in terms of tactics and equipment, are well understood 
by many even if they have not been involved in their military use. 
Conversely, the rapid evolution of cyber-technology and its novel 
ability to achieve effects akin to those generated by the use of more 
traditional forms of armed force would likely make it difficult to 
describe the practical application of IHL to cyberspace, even if its 
most important aspects were not classified.

- Bridging the gap between the classified cyber communities and the 
public to foster understanding of which legal norms and policies 
regarding the use of force are applicable is crucial to ensure 
transparency and critical assessment of this vitally important area to 
the greatest extent possible.

# {saxon2016violations}

- Cyber operations allow non-state actors, with relatively minimal 
effort, to pro-duce state-level violence during armed conflict.

- Fortunately, international legalnorms that guide the behaviour of 
states, groups and individuals during peaceand conflict also apply in 
cyberspace. The precise contours of the application,however,  remain  
undefined.

- The  latestgeneration of malware includes cyberweapons with 
extraordinary sophisticationand  capabilities,  including  the  
ability  to  operate  undetected  ‘in  the  wild’  ofcyberspace for 
extended periods of time. Indeed, the science of cyberweapontechnology 
is so complex that contemporary military commanders may possessonly a 
limited understanding of how these weapons function.

- Much  about  cyberwarfare  challenges  our  understanding  of  armed 
 conflict10and  the  application  of  international  humanitarian  
law.  Unlike  kinetic  weaponsystems,  cyberweapons  are  not  
machines  composed  of  many  physical  compo-nents; they are 
collections of data used to communicate instructions to softwareor  
hardware.11In  addition  to  their  technical  complexity,  one  
starkly  evidentquality  of  cyberweapons  is  (ironically)  their  
invisibleness.  This  characteristicof  software  code,  combined  
with  the  vast  anonymity  and  ‘interconnectivity’12of cyberspace, 
presents profound challenges  for the prosecution  of 
individualsresponsible for war crimes committed with cyberweapons.

- The authors of theTallinn Manualobserved that ‘the application of 
the law ofarmed  conflict  to  cyber  operations  can  prove  
problematic’.

- The particularly challenging char-acteristics of cyberspace and 
cyberweapons demand new thinking, and new fo-rensic techniques, for 
investigating and proving criminal responsibility. As 
cybertechnologies—both benign and malevolent—continuously evolve, the 
technicaland  legal  skills  of  prosecutors  and  investigators  must 
 also  develop  apace.

# {dinstein2012principle}

- Computer Network Attacks (CNAs) do not automatically come within the 
frame-work of the definition of ‘attack’ in conformity with the law of 
armed conflict(LOAC). 

- Consequently, some so-called CNAs (especially, those used only 
asmeans of intelligence gathering) do not qualify as ‘attacks’ in the 
sense ofLOAC. Only CNAs entailing ‘violence’ do. CNAs constituting 
‘attacks’ in theLOAC sense are governed by the same rules that apply 
to kinetic attacks. Inparticular, they are subject to the application 
of the cardinal principle of distinc-tion  between  
combatants/military  objectives  and  civilians/civilian  
objects.Consequently, deliberate attacks against civilians/civilian 
objects are prohibited,and so are indiscriminate attacks.

- When a civilian isengaged in any form in a CNA, the act constitutes 
direct participation in hosti-lities and the actor loses civilian 
protection from attack.

# (sutherland2015geneva)

- Considerable scholarly effort has been invested in interpreting the 
existing internationallegal instruments and diplomatic conventions 
that applyto kinetic warfare in relationto the field of 
cyber-warfare. 

- The TallinnManualand other documents argue thatcurrent humanitarian 
laws are applicable in cyber-conflict. 

- Thereisgeneral consensusamongstWestern states thatthe core 
legalconstructsthatapplyto kineticwarfareshouldalso applyin the 
cyber-domain.

- Thereare numerous examplesof acceptedmilitarydoctrine thatcanbe 
appliedto the conceptsofcyber-warfare–such as the US Departmentof 
Defense’s FieldManualsandtheUK JointService Manualonthe 
LawofArmedConflict –and it is recognised thatexisting 
internationalagreements applyto acts in cyberspace.

- Analysis of current legislation concludesthatthoseentitiesprotected 
duringakinetic conflict shouldbe accorded the sameprotectionduring 
acyber-conflict,as outlined in theTallinn Manual:‘totheextent 
persons,objects,and activitiesbenefit from the protection of the lawof 
armedconflictgenerally,theywillequallyenjoysuchprotectionwithregard to 
cyberoperations and attacks’.

- Currently,the realityis 
thatthemajorityoftransnationalcyber-attacksarecarriedout by non-state 
actorsandareoutsidewhatisconsidered to betraditionalinterstate  
armedconflict.These aggressorsdonot, forthe mostpart, adhere to the 
Geneva Conventions.

# {rowe2010ethics}

- Many people assume these are relatively benign weapons, but we argue 
they can create seriousharms like any weapon.

- Cyberweapons  are  software  used  to  attack  other  software  or  
data  within  computer  systems  (Bayles,  2001). We distinguish 
cyberweapons and cyberattacks (attacks using cyberweapons) from 
“information warfare”, amore   general   term   that   includes   
propaganda,   electronic   surveillance,   cyber-espionage,   and   
defensiveinformation operations.

- Like  conventional  weapons,  cyberweapons  can  be  used  against  
a  variety  of  targets  in  a  variety  ofcircumstances with a wide 
range of lethality.

- Proponents  have  cited  these  as  "clean"  weapons  that  are  
safer  than  conventionalweapons  since  they  do  not  damage  
physical  objects.

-  Furthermore,  unlike  chemical,biological,  and  nuclear  weapons,  
people  have  no  visceral  fear  of  cyberweapons  for  reasons  like 
 healthconsequences. 

# {dipert2010ethics}

- ‘Cyberwarfare’ is a recent term: the Oxford English Dictionary gives 
its firstuse as 1994.

- In May 2010, the US Department of Defense formed a fullcommand, 
Cyber Command, headed by a simultaneously promoted four-stargeneral, 
General Keith Alexander, who also continues to serve as director of 
the  US  National  Security  Agency  (NSA).  He  had  earlier  noted  
that  theChinese government has hackerscybersoldiersorganized into 
battalionsand regiments.

- Cyberwarfare has several unusual features. It is arguably the first 
major newform  of  warfare  since  the  development  of  nuclear  
weapons  and  interconti-nental missiles. This novelty has also meant 
that there is at present a virtualpolicy vacuum: there are no 
informed, open, public or political discussions ofwhat an ethical and 
wise policy for the use of such weapons would be.

- Second, it is very difficult to determine the source of 
cyberattacks: this isthe  ‘attribution  problem.’  This  fact  would  
give  many  cyberattacks  credibledeniabilityespecially since in many 
cases nations can plausibly claim thatthe   attacks   may   have   
originated   from   within   their   territory   but   
theirgovernments did not initiate them.

- Third,  many  cyberattacks  will  not  be  lethal  and  will  not  
even  result  inpermanent damage to physical objects. This is of 
course extremely dissimilarfrom nuclear weapons and from virtually all 
traditional weapons of war.

- Fourth, there are no exotic components to cyberweapons, again very 
unlikenuclear and other advanced technology weapons, and even unlike 
chemical orbiological  weapons.  Any  computer  is  a  potential  
cyberweapon  and  anyonewith advanced knowledge of information systems 
is a potential cybercomba-tant   (Talbot   2010).   This   makes   
treaties   that   would   ban   cyberweaponsvirtually impossible from 
the outset (Libicki 2009).

- One  feature  that  cyberwarfare  unfortunately  shares  with  
warfare  usingnon-cyber  weapons  is  that  defense  is  expensive  
and  liable  to  failure,  whileoffense  is  comparably  cheap:  this  
parallels  the  well-known  difficulties  withnuclear civil  defense,  
with  anti-missile  technologies,  body armor,  protectionagainst  
improvised  explosive  devices  (IEDs),  and  so  on  (Talbot  
2010).Another  feature  that  cyberwarfare  shares  with  conventional 
 warfare  is  thelow degree of certainty of what will happen with an 
attack, or in a war, andthat  there  are  distant,  deleterious  side  
effects  that  cannot  adequately  beanticipateddisease, economic 
consequences, and so on.

- On  close  examination,  cyberwarfare  appears  to  be  almost  
entirely  unad-dressed by the traditional morality and laws of war.

-  Insome rare cases, the morally permissible response to a 
cyberattack may be aharsher  retaliatory  cyberattack,  or  even  a  
conventional  attack.  As  notedelsewhere  (Owens  et  al.  1999:  
41f)  the  requirement  of  proportionality  inresponse to aggression 
does not require counterattack-in-kind, especially if itwould not 
redress the harm done, diminish the threat, or deter future 
attack.This seems to open a window in which a morally permissible 
proper responseto a damaging cyberattack is sometimes conventional, 
physical action.

- Nevertheless, a cyberattack may do such extensive damage to the 
well-beingof a populace, and to the functioning of a government, that 
it would satisfythecasus  belli(just  cause)  requirement  of  
reasonable  criteria  for  morallygoing to war.

- There  is  widespread  agreement  (Libicki,  Owens  et  al.,  and  
myself)  thatsomething  like  Cyber-arms  Control  treaties  will  not 
 be  forthcoming  andperhaps  even  would  be  impossible  to  
enforce.

- Cyberarms  are  very  unlike  conven-tional, nuclear, biological, 
and chemical (NBC) arms.

- Part of the problem is epistemic (attribution), but part is also due 
to the factthat cyberattack toolsunlike NBC weaponsare already held 
by diverseindividuals and non-state actors.

- Libicki and I tend to believe that the use orthreat of cyberattacks 
as deterrence is morally permissible and even desirableas policy.

- First, thereis a large array of possible scenarios involving 
cyberattacks for which there donot  exist  obvious  moral  reasoning,  
or  even  straightforward  analogies,  thatcould guide us.

-  Second, I am disturbed by the extent to which, through easyInternet 
access, much of our economic and defense informatics infrastructureis 
vulnerable to attack.

- Third,it  is  clear  especially  from  General  Alexander’s  
comments  (notably  his  2007paper) that serious thought is being 
devoted to the development of policy andstrategy. To date it has 
remained largely shrouded in secrecy. This will be, andmaybe even now 
may be, a serious problem, since the making public of manyelements of 
policy are absolutely required for a deterrent effect.

- Finally,  it  is  interesting  that,  as  far  as  I  can  see,  
traditional  ethical  andpolitical theoriesutilitarianism, Kantian 
theory, natural rights theory, etc.cast so little light on this new, 
and difficult domain. Certainly no one of thesetheories seems at a 
special advantage in clarifying the issues

# {meulenbelt2012worm}

- In October 2010, the British government stated in the National 
Security Strategy that cyber-crime had become one of the ‘tier one 
threats’ to the UK, putting it on a par with (international) 
terrorism.

- The world's superpower, the US, even fears that cyber-attacks are 
possibly going to be its ‘next Pearl Harbour’.

- The discovery of the so-called ‘Stuxnet worm’ in June 2010, which 
‘is believed to be the first-known worm designed to target real-world 
[critical] infrastructure such as (nuclear) power stations, water 
plants and industrial units’, suggests that a threat indeed exists.

- Experts have claimed that Stuxnet's complexity suggests it could 
only have been written by a state. There are strong clues that Israel, 
in co-operation with the US, developed and tested this worm in order 
to bring the Iranian nuclear programme to a standstill.

- The emergence of ‘electronic and cyberwar-fighting capabilities’ has 
been described as ‘the most important military development in decades, 
but it is not yet clear how existing treaties and conventions might 
apply in this new domain of conflict’.

- Cyber-attacks are a relatively new phenomenon. The Russian 
cyber-attack on Estonia in 2007 is considered the first large-scale 
incident of a cyber-assault on a state.

- Because of cyber-attacks’ ‘newness’, international law is still 
struggling to provide a framework for it. For instance, there is no 
clear international legal definition of cyber-attacks. 

- Furthermore, there are currently no specific international 
provisions to regulate cyber-attacks. Yet, the international nature of 
this rapidly growing problem – consider that cyber-attacks often cross 
multiple administrative, jurisdictional and national boundaries – 
indicates that it does require an international response.

- In addition, the potential damage that can result from a 
cyber-attack, the fact the equipment required for perpetrating an 
attack is cheap and widely available, as well as the expertise 
required, and that it can be done from anywhere in the world also 
suggests that a common international legal approach to address the 
problem is needed. 

- Currently, there is no universal agreement on the precise meaning of 
a cyber-attack, its consequences and whether it constitutes force or 
not, nor how to respond to it. In other words, there is no certainty 
as to how the international community will or should apply the 
principles of international law to regulate cyber-attacks.

- Nevertheless, it is generally agreed upon that cyber-attacks are a 
breach of the customary international law principle of 
non-intervention, because they interfere in the internal and/or 
external affairs of a state.

-  In the absence of specific provisions to regulate cyber-attacks, 
these principles of non-intervention and due diligence can provide a 
framework for dealing with the issue.

# {dunlap2013some}

- In a recent op-ed, President Obama warns that “the cyber threat to 
our nation is one of the most se-rious economic and national security 
challenges we face.

# {fleck2013searching}

- TheTallinn Manual on the International Law Applicable to Cyber 
Warfare1wasprepared at the invitation of the NATO Cooperative Cyber 
Defence Centre ofExcellence  (CCDCOE).  

- As  declared  by  the  Centre,  this  work  is  ‘intended  tolead 
to a restatement and manual on the international law applicable to 
cyber warfare, similar to the manuals on the law applicable to armed 
conflicts at sea(1994)  and  air  and  missile  warfare  (2010)’

- Although  theManualtext  itself  takes  a  more  cautious  approach  
by  statingthat ‘any claim that every assertion in the Manual 
represents an incontrovertiblerestatement of international law would 
be an exaggeration’ and that theManual‘does not set forthlex ferenda, 
best practice, or preferred policy’

- By applying ‘extant legal norms’ to cyberspace, theTallinn 
Manualconvincinglyshows  that  international  law  is  not  silent  on 
 new  technological  developments.

- Hence, any claim that cyber operations were subjectto  international 
 legal  regulation  only  on  the  basis  of  new  treaty  law  has  
beenconvincingly  proven  by  the  International  Group  of  Experts  
as  being  legallyunfounded.

- TheTallinn Manualdoes not offer a discussion of cyber operations 
below thethreshold of an (international or non-international) armed 
conflict.

# {barrett2015reliable}

- The FirstGulf War, with its precision guided munitions (PGMs), was a 
first step in redeemingmodern distance warfare. But cyber capabilities 
represent a leap. With them, statesostensibly can create tailored 
effects from a distance, and do soBnon-kinetically^—without mass 
moving through space. Cyber capabilities promise to marry the 
precision ofPGMs and reach of unmanned aerial vehicles to the light 
touch of so-called non-lethalweapons.

- Cyber-espionage enables state and non-state actors—often 
incollusion—to steal economic and governmental information, and thus 
undermine asociety’s prosperity and security.

- Second, the direct effects of cyber-attacks includedamage and 
destruction of computer hardware, software, and data.

- Third, because oflinks between computer networks the external world, 
indirect effects of cyber-attacksinclude damage and destruction to 
property, and injury and death to persons.

- Fourth,grave indirect effects can result from merely temporary 
losses of computer functionality.

- A fifth reason forconcern: attribution difficulties undermine 
punishment-based deterrence of all thesescenarios

- And finally, inadequate intelligence on targeted networks can 
render cyber-attacks indiscriminate and disproportionate.

- Contrary to the concerns of some ethicists, the traditionaljust war 
criteria—if properly understood—are capable of providing the guidance 
thatleaders need to legitimately respond to and conduct cyber 
operations.

- In the cyber domain, the number ofad bellumandin belloissues 
requiring analysis issmall, and the traditional just war criteria are 
capable of providing ethical guidance.

- However, military cyber operations highlight two theoretical issues 
within just wartradition that deserve further attention. First, while 
the criteria provide clear guidelinesconcerning lethal defensive 
responses to cyber-attacks, and concerning the use of cyberforce 
within wars, they lack specificity concerning justified responses to 
the constantlow-level harm most likely to be encountered in 
cyberspace. Second, what rules must govern the use of nonlethal 
forceagainst liableBindirect participants^such as financial 
supporters?

# {delerue2019reinterpretation}

- The development of cyber threats constitutes a significant challenge 
for international peace andstability.

- Professors Heike Krieger and Georg Nolte have correctly 
identifiedthat the development of cyberspace may create new challenges 
for international law.

- Thus, and second, the development of cyberspace and cyber operations 
challenges norms ofinternational law that already face a certain level 
of uncertainty and contestation in both their con-tent and their 
application.

- In this complex context, the successive UN GGEhave managed to 
reach agreement and produce reports. The 2013 and 2015 reports were 
particu-larly significant because they acknowledged the applicability 
of international law and the UNCharter to cyberspace.

- In June 2017, however, thefifth UN GGE failed to reach a consensuson 
itsfinal report. Some states dispute the applicability to cyberspace 
of entire branches of inter-national law, such as the law of armed 
conflict, self-defence and counter-measures. This situationposes a 
particular challenge to international law and there is a risk of 
geographical fragmentationof international law norms applicable to 
cyberspace.

- The applicability of international law to cyberspace and cyber 
operations has been settled in bothstate practice and the academic 
literature. Consequently, the question has now become‘what isthe 
specific interpretation and application of the norms of international 
law in this challengingcontext?'

- This question has been tackled by various initiatives, such as the 
UN GGE and alsothe Tallinn Manual process sponsored by the NATO 
Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre ofExcellence (CCDCOE), which led to 
the adoption of the two editions of the Tallinn Manual pub-lished in 
2013 and 2017.

# {assidiq2020qualifying}

- Today’s  technological  developments  have  resulted  in  the  
emergence  of  various  new  crimes  threatening  the  international  
community.  In  recent  decades,  there  have been various forms of 
cybercrimes targeted at the communication networks and  defense  
systems  of  countries  by  other  countries,  known  as  cyber  
warfare.  Unfortunately, international law has not specified this as a 
crime, but its impact has caused violations of sovereignty and 
disruption of national security, resulting in material loss, breakdown 
of communication networks and obstruction of social and  public  
services  based  on  the  internet,  such  as  what  happened  in  
Estonia  in  2007.

- Cyber  warfare  is  the  use  of  cyber  technology  to  attack  
various  public  facilities  that  are related to the national 
security and sovereignty of a country by another country, either  
directly  or  through  an  established  proxy.

- The  last  35  years  has  shown  the  involvement of countries in 
cyberattacks against other countries, such as Operation Orchard  
involving  Israel  and  Syria,  the  cyberattack  on  Estonia  in  
2007  allegedly  carried  out  by  Russia,  and  Operation  Olympic  
Games  (Stuxnet  case)  involving  the  US  and  Iran  in  2010.  In  
CASCON  records,  there  have  been  85  cases  of  “kinetic”warfare,3 
which means the “utilization of technology as a tool to attack one 
state.”

- Until  today,  no  international  convention  or  agreement  on  
cybercrime  has  been  adopted.5At this time, there is only a draft 
manual from NATO that is used as guidelines for cyberattacks  regarded 
 as  crimes  of  aggression,  cyber  operations  against  important  
infrastructure  of  a  country,  and  cyberattacks  targeting  enemy  
commands  and  control  systems.

- Technology  is  developing  rapidly,  and  if  it  is  not  properly 
 controlled,  a  new  form  of  armed  attacks  would  threaten  the  
peace  and  stability  of  the  international  community.  A  
cyberattack  is  a  new  international  crime.  

- Since  the  late  1980s,  cyberattacks have evolved to use ICT 
innovations to commit cybercrimes. 

- In recent years,  notable  developments,  such  as  the  cyberattack 
 in  Estonia  in  2007  allegedly  carried out by Russia and the 
Operation Olympic Games (Stuxnet) involving the US and  Iran  in  
2010,  have  sparked  the  need  to  seriously  consider  monitoring  
internet-based  crimes  across  the  world.  These  crimes  have  also 
 caused  material  loss  to  the  affected countries.

-  Cyberattack is considered as a form of war maneuver in order to 
defeat  the  opponent  and  destroying  their  ability  to  
counterattack.  

- The  absence  of  international  norms  to  regulate  cybercrime  in 
 the  form  of  cyber  war  could  trigger  kinetic  warfare. 

# {thumfart2020public}

- There is a growing tendency to apply just war theory to cyberspace.

- First: just war theory drafts a way in which individual states can 
secure international peace.

- since they are not directly connected to military losses, relatively 
cheap to execute anddifficult to attribute, cyber warfare and cyber 
attacks encourage offensive strategies.

- Although it is a broad consensus that international law and the UN 
Charter in general apply tocyberspace, there is still no specific 
international legal framework concerning cyber attacks

- This lack of legal framework or even basic orientation primarily 
concerns jus ad bellum, i.e.thequestion of when a state has the right 
to retaliate cyber attacks proportionately.

- The Tallinn Manual 2.0, which is issued by NATO to clarify the 
application of international lawto cyber attacks, is explicitly 
undecided on the matter. On the one hand, it generally states that“the 
right to employ force in self-defence extends beyond kinetic armed 
attacks to those that areperpetrated solely through cyber operations.” 
And it expresses a broad consensus by stating thata “cyber operation 
that seriously injures or kills a number of persons or that causes 
significantdamage to, or destruction of, property would satisfy the 
scale and effects requirement” 

- On the other hand, the manual expresses significant uncertainty 
concerning cyber aggressionswithout direct physical consequences, such 
as the manipulation of elections, stock markets ordeliberative 
processes in the public sphere. “The case of cyber operations that do 
not result ininjury,  death,  damage,  or  destruction,  but  that  
otherwise  have  extensive  negative  effects,remains unsettled"

- Likewise, in 2018, the US State Department called for a “fundamental 
rethinking” of “strategiesfor deterring malicious cyber activities” 

- This is all the more urgent because in cyberspace “the top 
techcompanies appear to be as powerful as States, and sometimes even 
more so, to prevent cyberattacks, attribute them and to respond to 
malicious acts”. And Facebook and Google have already engaged in 
active cyber defense without having been prosecuted by the US 
government.

- Nevertheless,  the  Tallinn  Manual  unambiguously  reads:  “Only  
States  may  takecountermeasures. For example, an information 
technology firm may not act on its own initiativein responding to a 
harmful cyber operation” 

-  A clear expression of this virtually globalconsensus is that cyber 
attacks with physically violent effects are extremely rare, also 
beyondNATO states. Due to their unclear legal status much more 
attractive and frequent are cyberaggressions  aimed  at  manipulating  
deliberative  processes  in  the  public  sphere.  They  aretherefore 
a much more urgent object of a theory of just cyberwar.

- Due to these questions, in section 1, I will go back to the origin 
of modern just war theory andinternational law, to Francisco de 
Vitoria, who developed a framework of international law 
thatunderstands  communication  as  the  highest  normative  value.  
Contrary  to  contemporarymisconceptions of just war theory (Taddeo, 
2014, p. 7), Vitoria’s original doctrine did not focuson the 
physicality of the means or the effects of an attack as casus belli, 
but rather on the gravityof the violation of rights connected to an 
attack, especially in regard to communication, whichmakes his theory 
interesting to contemporary problems.

- In this context, I will also discuss Vitoria’s early answer to the 
attribution problem in section 2:the conduct of coercion-free and 
transparent multi-stakeholder discourses that minimise therisk  of  
false  attribution,  which  resembles  the  contemporary  demand  to  
constitute  anindependent global institution responsible for 
attributing cyber attacks 

- This  contribution  aimed  at  counteracting  two  shortcomings  of  
just  cyberwar  theory:  theinsufficient discussion of non-violent 
cyberattacks that are directed at the public sphere and theomission of 
the role of non-state actors.

- In section 1, I discussed the problem of the lack of immediate 
physical violence of cyber attackson the public sphere. This makes it 
difficult to characterise them as a prohibited use of forceunder the 
UN Charter.

- Also, I discussed newer frameworks, such as the Tallinn Manual’s 
effect-based and coercion-centred approach to the assessment of cyber 
attacks

# {barrett2017relationship}

- This essay will examine this question byfirst critiquing a legal 
anal-ysis of a new form of conflict: military cyber operations. These 
operations possessan unusual combination of characteristics as they 
() do not involve munitionsmoving  through  space  and  across  
borders,  ()  often  originate  from  or  traverseinnocent 
third-party states, () can be difficult to attribute, () are often 
purveyedby nonstate actors, and () frequently produce effects that do 
not neatly coincidewith legal definitions such as“uses of force.”

- As a consequence of these unusualcharacteristics,  experts  have  
labored  to  apply  to  cyber  operations  existing  legalframeworks  
that  govern  international  violence.  The  most  influential  effort 
 todate has been theTallinn Manual on the International Law 
Applicable toCyber  Warfare;

- While states have always used sublethal harms to weaken adversaries 
eco-nomically, militarily, ideologically, culturally, and politically, 
technological devel-opments  have  magnified  the  regularity  and  
effectiveness  of  these  practices,particularly  against  free  
societies.

# {schmitt2015notion}

- The cyber operations mounted during the Russia–Ukraine and 
Palestine–Israel conflicts of 2014have demonstrated the continued 
necessity for clarification as to how international law is to 
beinterpreted and applied with respect to activities in 
cyberspace.1Unfortunately, the few state-ments that states have issued 
on the matter lack the granularity required to be 
operationallymeaningful.

- State reticence to stake out positions with regard to cyber 
operations has become chronic. Thecyber operations conducted against 
Estonia in 2007 and mounted during the international armedconflict 
between Georgia and Russia the following year revealed a distinct lack 
of forethought onthe part of the international law community in 
general, and states in particular, as to howinternational 
law–especially thejus ad bellum(law governing the resort to force by 
states) andjus in bello(international humanitarian law or IHL)–governs 
activities in cyberspace.

- Inresponse to this lacuna, the NATO Cooperative Cyber Defence Centre 
of Excellence, which isbased in Tallinn (Estonia), commissioned a 
three-year research project to examine the law ofcyber conflict. The 
project drew together an‘International Group of Experts’(IGE) which 
con-sisted of 16 renowned international law academics and 
practitioners working in their personalcapacity (numerous experts were 
then serving as senior legal advisers for their governments).A team of 
technical advisers assisted them and observers from NATO, the United 
StatesCyber Command and the International Committee of the Red Cross 
(ICRC) participated activelyduring the deliberations. The work of the 
IGE was subsequently peer reviewed by 13 inter-national law 
specialists andfine-tuned based on their recommendations. In 2013, 
CambridgeUniversity Press published thefinal product as theTallinn 
Manual on the International LawApplicable to Cyber Warfare.

- The Tallinn Manual consists of 95‘rules’adopted unanimously by the 
IGE. Each ruleexpressed the IGE’s opinion regarding the state of 
customary international law (including thatreflected in key treaties 
such as the UN Charter) as of July 2012, the date of the meeting 
atwhich it adopted thefinal draft. The requirement for unanimity meant 
that the rules reflectedthe lowest common normative denominator.

- Accompanying each of the rules is commentary that identifies its 
legal basis, explains its nor-mative content, addresses practical 
implications thereof in the cyber context, and sets forth dif-fering 
views on the scope or interpretation of the rule

- Thesine qua nonof the Tallinn Manual process was agreement on the 
applicability of thejusad bellumandjus in belloto cyber operations. 
Consensus was quickly achieved on this point, one that appears to be 
widely accepted today.

- With regard to IHL, the experts accordingly concurredthat the extant 
law governed cyber weapons and cyber operations;6the issue was 
notwhetherIHLapplied, buthow.

- The reaction of the international legal community to the Tallinn 
Manual, especially state legaladvisers, has been favourable. Today it 
is widely used in ministries of defence and foreign affairs.With 
respect to its IHL provisions, only two issues have generated 
noteworthy debate–themeaning of the term‘attack’, a topic addressed in 
passing below, and the IHL notion of‘objects’,the focus of this 
article. Both have been the subject of debate behind closed doors 
during gov-ernmental discussions and in open discourse throughout 
academia. The question with respect tothe latter is 
whether‘data’constitutes an object such that the IHL protection 
afforded to civilianobjects extends to it.

- This process will be evolutionary, not revolutionary. States are 
unlikely to countenance treatingall (or even just operational-level) 
data as an object subject to the relevant IHL prohibitions.

# (lin2009lifting)

- Given the reality of a densely interconnected     informa-tion 
society, much has been written  about  the  possibility  that 
adversaries of the US—such as ter-rorists  or  hostile  nations—might 
conduct   damaging   cyberattacks against critical sectors of our 
econ-omy  and  national  infrastructure, which  depend  on  reliably  
func-tioning,  secure  computer  systems and networks.

- For some years, the topic  of  cybersecurity  has  been an important 
part of the National Research  Council’s  (NRC’s)  re-port  portfolio, 
 and  a  great  deal  of national  attention  has  focused  on the 
problem of how to protect the US  against  such  attacks—that  is, how 
 to  defend  these  systems  and networks   in   both   military   and 
non-military    contexts.   

-  This reality  hasn’t  been  lost  on  the  US government, which 
acknowledges that  it  has  interests  in  cyberattack capabilities as 
a possible instrument of  national  policy.

- The  pri-mary message of that study is that US acquisition and use 
of cyberat-tack raise several important policy issues  that  many  
policy  makers don’t  understand  well.

- A  greater degree  of  transparency  on  this topic will help the 
nation have an informed debate about the poten-tially  very  important 
 role  of  cy-berattack  as  an  instrument  of  US policy, and will 
provide the over-sight  necessary  to  exercise  these capabilities  
in  an  appropriate  and responsible fashion that serves the overall 
national interest.  

- Cyberattack  technologies  bring to  the  forefront  of  policy  a 
wide range of possibilities in many dimensions: they raise several new 
policy  issues,  provide  many  more options for operational 
command-ers,  and  complicate  existing  legal regimes  to  a  
considerable  extent. 

# {goldsmith2013cyber}

- Michael Walzer’s Just and Unjust Wars anticipated many problems and 
developments in the laws of  war. But it understandably did not 
anticipate how the Internet and asso-ciated computer and 
telecommunications revolutions would change war or the laws that 
govern it.

-  In 1977, the year Walzer’s book was published, Arpanet, the 
Internet’s precursor, had been operating in practical secrecy with a 
crude packet-switching sys-tem for just eight years; the first email 
system was five years old; and Vinton Cerf  and Bob Kahn had used the 
term ‘Internet’ for the first time in a paper on the Transmission 
Control Protocol just three years earlier. 

- No one at this time, or for more than a decade, would worry much 
about the internal security vulnerabilities of  this developing 
com-munications  system.  The  wake-up  call  for  security,  such  as 
 it  was,  came  in  1988,  when  Robert  Tappan  Morris,  a  graduate 
 student  at  Cornell,  introduced  a  worm  on  the Internet that was 
designed to determine the Internet’s size but that inadvertently shut  
down  about  10  per  cent  of   the  60,000  computers  then  
connected  to  it.1  This  event startled the Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency (DARPA), the futuristic Department of  
Defense (DOD) research wing. DARPA had given its financial support to 
what became the Internet to ensure that military communications could 
withstand nuclear attack. But suddenly its young creation seemed 
vulnerable from within.

- These vulnerabilities would grow in the next two decades because, 
despite growing cyber-security  concerns,  the  military  and  the  
society  it  defends  would  become  ever  more reliant on ever more 
vulnerable computer and telecommunication systems. 

- Even if  we assume that some of  the puzzles in Section 2 can be 
worked out, and that nations of  the world can agree in theory on how 
jus ad bellum and jus in bello should apply to the cyber realm, a 
further hurdle stands in the way of  developing true inter-national 
norms to reflect this substantive agreement.9 The main hurdle is 
verification, which is difficult in the cyber realm because 
attribution is challenging.

- If  one sees the laws of  war in instrumental terms, akin to 
solutions to a prisoners’ dilemma, then it is doubtful that a rational 
government would forego using otherwise desired cyber-exploitation or 
cyber-attack capabilities in compliance with an interna-tional norm in 
exchange for mutual restraint by adversaries. The main reason is that 
a government cannot tell whether its adversary is complying with the 
norm, and thus it  cannot  know  (until  it  is  too  late)  whether  
it  is  receiving  a  benefit  for  its  restraint.  Moreover, 
cooperation in the prisoners’ dilemma depends on credible retaliation 
when there is breach. Uncertainty in attribution makes retaliation for 
breach much harder for any president or general to order. (‘Sir, we 
are 28 per cent sure the Chinese did it.’) And this in turn makes 
retaliation less credible to some probably large degree, which in turn 
invites breach and unravels cooperation.

- And in fact there have been many reports that the DOD is deeply 
self-constrained – some say too constrained – by the laws of  war in 
its use of  offensive cyber weapons.

- There are many reasons for scepticism, but the main one is the 
problem of  attribution. The laws of  war would not be nearly as 
efficacious or have the same level of  normative salience, if  the 
nations that violated the laws could not  be  identified  and  
publicly  shamed.  Norms  cannot  get  much  purchase  in  a  world 
without serious attribution; anonymity is a norm destroyer. That, 
unfortu-nately, is the situation in the cyber realm. The problem is 
exacerbated by the fact that, even if  a nation has perfect 
attribution, it often cannot publicly reveal the evidence  of   
attribution  because  doing  so  would  disclose  espionage  and  
attribu-tion capabilities and render them less useful. To the extent 
that this is so, it makes the  public  shaming  aspects  of   a  
verification  regime,  and  thus  the  operation  of   norms, less 
robust.

-  The moderately good news, I think, is that, although many nations 
have the capabilities to engage in large-scale cyber war, they are not 
using the weapons because doing so would be self-defeating. Even with 
the cloak of  relative anonymity, the poten-tial  catastrophic  costs  
to  the  globally  integrated  computer  and  telecommunications  
infrastructure from a large-scale cyber war creates powerful 
disincentives for a nation to engage in such war. One can, if  one 
likes, call mutual restraint of  this sort a ‘norm’. This  norm  is  
nothing  more  than  a  behavioural  regularity  resulting  from  the  
coinci-dence of  uncoordinated self-interest among nations. But if  
every nation continues to have such independent incentives, cyber war 
might not emerge.

- It  is  true  that  China has significant offensive cyber 
capacities that could in theory cause enormous destruction, and that 
it is stockpiling cyber weapons and planning for cyber war. But the  
same  is  true  of   the  United  States.

- Capacities  and  contin-gency plans, taken alone, do not add up to a 
serious threat. There must also be a plau-sible scenario in which a 
nation has the motivation to use these weapons.

- It is also possible that the stealth cyber-arms  race,  the  
difficulty  of   knowing  for  sure  which  nation  is  behind  a  
cyber  attack,  and the general absence of  effective norms to govern 
such attacks combine to create an unstable situation in which 
destructive cyber activities might escalate by accident. 

# {droege2012get}

- Cyber warfarefigures prominently on the agenda of policymakers and 
militaryleaders around the world. New units to ensure cyber security 
are created at variouslevels of government, including in the armed 
forces.

- But cyber operations in armedconflict situations could have 
potentially very serious consequences, in particularwhen their effect 
is not limited to the data of the targeted computer system orcomputer. 
Indeed, cyber operations are usually intended to have an effect in 
the‘realworld’. 

- It is therefore important to discuss the rules of 
internationalhumanitarian law (IHL) that govern such operations 
because one of the mainobjectives of this body of law is to protect 
the civilian population from the effects ofwarfare.

- In particular, the interconnectednessof cyber space poses a 
challenge to the most fundamental premise of the rules on theconduct 
of hostilities, namely that civilian and military objects can and 
must bedistinguished at all times. Thus, whether the traditional rules 
of IHL will providesufficient protection to civilians from the effects 
of cyber warfare remains to be seen.Their interpretation will 
certainly need to take the specificities of cyber space intoaccount. 
In the absence of better knowledge of the potential effects of cyber 
warfare, itcannot be excluded that more stringent rules might be 
necessary.

- Cyber securityfigures prominently on the agenda of policymakers and 
militaryleaders around the world. A recently published study by the 
United NationsInstitute for Disarmament Research (UNIDIR) describes 
the measures taken bythirty-three states that have specifically 
included cyber warfare in their militaryplanning and organisation, and 
gives an overview of the cyber security approach ofthirty-six other 
states.1These range from states with very advanced statementsof 
doctrine and military organisations employing hundreds or thousands 
ofindividuals to more basic arrangements that incorporate cyber attack 
and cyberwarfare into existing capabilities for electronic warfare. A 
number of states aresetting up specialized units in or outside of 
their armed forces to deal with cyberoperations.2It has also been 
reported that twelve of the world’sfifteen largestmilitary forces are 
building cyber warfare programmes.

- As noted in the introduction, cyber operations will entail new means 
and methodsof combat, the effects of which are still untested or 
poorly understood. 

- It appears,however, that military use of information technology 
poses serious challenges to theapplication of IHL, in particular with 
respect to the very premise that civilian andmilitary objects can and 
must be distinguished in armed conflict.

- In order to obtainclear statements about how states intend to 
respect the principles of distinction,proportionality, and precaution, 
this should be discussed more openly and candidlythan has been the 
case until now.

- In light of the dangers that cyber warfare poses to civilian 
infrastructurea number of solutions are being proposedde lege 
lataandde lege ferenda.Oneproposal is for states to make declaratory 
statements about digital safe havens,that is, civilian targets that 
they will consider off-limits in the conduct of cyber operations. If 
agreed among the parties, this would be akin to the demilitarizedzones 
foreseen in Article 60 of Additional Protocol I. 

- Given the concealed nature of much of what appears to be the 
currentmanipulation and infiltration of cyber space, it is not clear 
how much trust will be putin agreements or statements on cyber areas 
that would be off-limits for military use.

- Another proposal made by Geiss and Lahmann is to expand the list 
of‘works and installations containing dangerous forces’in Article 56 
of AdditionalProtocol I by analogy. This could apply to specific cyber 
infrastructurecomponents, such as major Internet exchange nodes or 
central servers on whichmillions of important civilian functions 
rely. 

- Going further, the challenges posed by the cyber realm have also 
raised thequestion whether (some) means and methods of cyber warfare 
should be bannedaltogether or regulated by international treaty. As 
mentioned in the introduction,some states have advocated for a new 
treaty in this respect, although the contours ofwhat should and should 
not be allowed are not always entirely clear. A paralleldebate is also 
being held among cyber security experts and academics. Somehave 
proposed new treaties on cyber warfare,155while others argue that 
there shouldbe a type of disarmament treaty with a ban on all or at 
least some cyber weapons.

- Still others counter that a treaty would not be enforceable because 
of the difficultiesof attribution, that it would be technically 
impossible to distinguish betweeninstruments of cyber warfare and 
cyber espionage, that the banned weaponscould be less damaging than 
traditional weapons, and that verification would beimpossible.

- Some commentators propose other solutions, such as‘informal 
multi-lateralism’,158or an international cyber security organisation, 
along the lines of theInternational Atomic Energy Agency, as an 
independent platform for internationalcooperation, with the aim of 
developing treaties to control cyber weapons

- In the meantime, ifparties to conflicts choose cyber weapons during 
armed conflicts they must be awareof the existing legal framework as a 
minimum set of rules to respect, despite theirlimitations. They must 
instruct and train their forces accordingly.

-  It is important topromote the discussion of these issues, to raise 
awareness of the need to assess thehumanitarian impact of developing 
technologies, and to ensure that they are notprematurely employed 
under conditions in which respect for the law cannot beguaranteed.

- In conclusion, there is no question that IHL applies to cyber 
warfare.However, whether it will provide sufficient protection to the 
civilian population, inparticular by shielding civilian infrastructure 
from harm, will depend on howIHL–whose drafters did not envisage such 
operations–is interpreted with respectto them. Only if interpreted in 
good faith and with the utmost care will it be possibleto protect 
civilian infrastructure from being directly targeted or from 
sufferingdamage that could potentially be disastrous for the civilian 
population. Even then,considering the potential weaknesses of the 
principles of distinction, proportion-ality, and precaution–and in the 
absence of more profound knowledge of offensivecapabilities and 
effects–it cannot be excluded that more stringent rules might 
benecessary.

# {lucas2014ethics}

- Contributors to the recent special issue ofJME(12:1) chose 
collectively to address perhapsthe most vexed and ominous of the 
ongoing ethics debates over military technology: theprospects for 
cyber warfare. 

- Much of this followed in the wake ofthe alleged Russian attack on 
Estonia in 2007, culminating in the‘Tallinn Manual’(Tallinn2012), 
which attempts to apply existing statutes of international law to the 
cyber domain.

- The special issue ofJME(12:1), published early in 2013, constitutes, 
to my knowledge,the first collective effort to address the ethical 
challenges of cyber warfare, and as such itdeserves praise and also 
critical engagement.

# {braman2017emanations}

- The Tallinn Manual of 2013 and its second edition, the Tallinn 
Manual 2.0 of 2017, are NATO-funded analyses of how existing 
international laws of war apply to cybersecurity and cyberwarfare. 

- A characteristic of the Tallinn manuals that makes them worth 
studying now and ensures they will have very long shelf lives as desk 
references is that they include not only “black letter” points of law 
and other matters on which they all agreed [2]. They also discuss 
points upon which they could not agree, identifying majority and 
minority positions and in most cases including arguments offered by 
those who take each position.

- a second, somewhat smaller group of experts — partially overlapping 
with the group of those involved in the 2013 volume and partially not 
— was convened to work on a second edition by the NATO Cooperative 
Cyber Defense Center of Excellence (NATO CCD COE, https://ccdcoe.org/) 
in Tallinn, Estonia, that provided the institutional home for these 
processes.

-  As Kuhn tells us, the very level of complexity of the reasoning in 
the Tallinn manuals is a sign that the phenomena, events, and 
processes they talk about are not fully, or accurately, understood.

# {remus2013cyber}

- Since  no  international  instrument  whatsoever cover  the  cyber  
attacks  the  analogies with   current   international   solutions   
are   largely   employed. 

- We   illustrate   also   the developments  with relevant examples 
taken  from  main powers’ doctrine and practice (US, Russia   and   
China).   The   starting   points   are   the   provisions   regarding 
  the   use   of (armed)"force"  under  Article  2(4)  and  “armed  
attack”  under  Article  51  of  United  Nations Charter. 

- The  qualification  of  a  cyber  attack  as  use  of  “armed  
force”  or  “armed  attack”  is based  a  multi  criteria  threshold  
developed  by  Schmitt.

- Other  developments  focus  the capacity   of   present   
International   law   concepts   (direct   and   indirect   armed   
attack, identification  of  the  aggressor  state,  pertinence  of  
pre-emptive  or  interceptive  self  defense vis-à-vis cyber ‘armed 
attack’, etc.) to answer cyber warfare’s structures and challenges.

- Computer attacks originate in the world of hackers, major actors in 
information revolution which began in the 50s and achieved its 
momentum in the following decades.

- he  first  step  of  the  evolution  was  the  advent  of  ‘viruses’ 
 and  ‘Trojan horses’  which  allowed  hackers  to  take  control  of  
someone  else’s  computer  in  order  to  steal,  alter  or destroy 
information. The later spreading of the Internet allowed the upgrading 
of these techniques through ‘viruses’ and computer ‘worms’ that can 
multiply and spread throughout networks. In the meantime new ‘network  
malicious  techniques’  (such  as  denial-of-service-DOS,  distributed 
 denial-of-service  –DDOS  or ‘botnets’) came into being.  

- By  the  end  of  the  80s  the  American  Department  of  Defense  
became  aware  of  the  new  threats. However  the  real  menaces  
were  considered  the  attacks  committed  outside  the  crime  domain 
 and perpetrated  at  international  level  (by  a  State,  on behalf  
of  a  State  by  terrorists,  etc.). 

-  The  US  military doctrine characterized them as Computer Networks 
Operations (CNO) under three different branches: 

  * Computer  Network  Attacks  (CNA)  were  defined  as  operations  
to  disrupt,  deny,  degrade,  or destroy  information  resident  in  
computers,  computer  networks,  or  the  computers  and  networks 
themselves

  * Computer  Network  Defences  (CND)  were  defined  as  defensive  
measures  to  protect  and  defend information,  computers,  and  
networks  from  disruption,  denial,  degradation  or  destruction.  
They used   security   measures   that   seek   to   keep   the   
enemy from   learning   about   own   military capabilities and 
intentions.

  * Computer  Network  Exploitations  (CNE)  covered  the  collecting  
and  monitoring  of  enemy’s information.  Usually  they  involve  
espionage  performed  with  tools  that  penetrate  systems  and 
return information or copies of files enabling the military to gain an 
advantage over the enemy

- If  the  US  made  the  first  steps  in  the  field  they  were  
soon  followed  by  Russia  and  China.3Russia considers  the  cyber  
means  an  asymmetric  method  for challenging  US  warfare  
supremacy,  as  part  of  a total warfare approach

- The  Chinese  military  doctrine  is  similar.  For  example  Wang  
Pufeng,  general  of  the  People's Liberation  Army,  considers  that 
 “our  war  strategies  must  adapt  to  the  needs  of  the  war  
information.  Wemust make multiple uses of force and, especially, of 
non-linear war and methods of multiple information warfare”.

- The main pillars of legal analysis were the provisions regarding the 
use of "force" under Article 2(4) and “armed  attack”  under  Article  
51  of  United  Nations  Charter. The  characterization  of  a  
cyber-attack  as “armed  force”  or  “armed  attack”  was  based  on  
a  multi  criteria  threshold  developed  by  Schmitt  and grounded  
on  its  ‘destructiveness’. 

- Some  other  challenging  aspects  were  also  explored  (the  proof 
 of  state implication,  the  preemptive  or  interceptive  
self-defense,  etc).  We  uncovered  the  inherent  difficulties  for 
characterizing cyber-attack under the actual framework of armed 
conflict. 

- The  evolution  of  real  cyber-attacks  shows  these  States  
acting  hidden  behind  private  actors  (in  the  case  of  Russia  
or  China)  or  using highly specialized military forces (in the case 
of the US). 

- Nobody is willing to escalate computer network attack  to  match  
the  “armed  attack”  standard  (according  to  Schmitt’s  criteria)  
and  to  risk  triggering  alegitimate  defense  and  eventually  a  
full  blown  war.  Therefore  one  may  qualify  all  these  uses  of  
cyber means  as  “cyber  warfare”  only  as  metaphor.  Under  the  
actual  international  normative  framework  most cyber acts that can 
be (loosely) linked to a State belong to cyber exploitation. This is 
in fact a new secret terrain that increases the reach of States.

# {lilienthal2015cyber}

- Submarine war and special operations, as well as the oper-ational 
profile of the treacherous assassin, have been foundto be essentially 
the same as cyber warfare. However, thescholarship suggested that 
cyber-warfare was more in thenature of information operations. 
However, this could beconstrued as indistinguishable from the ancient 
mechanismof fraud and deception. Argument suggested that it waslikely 
that, if an information operation might provoke anarmed defence, a 
kinetic outcome would be the end link in achain of causation. The 
argument suggested that, per theEstonian cyber-attacks case, 
investigations were unlikely tofollow the chains of causation all the 
way down to their finallevels, at which consequential physical damage 
might befound.

- On Brownlie's critique, a biological weapon affecting anenemy's 
decision-making or psychological abilities would beindistinguishable 
in character from a cyber-attack producingthe same physical 
consequence. 

- Buchen deduced that if theStuxnet virus did destroy centrifuges at 
Natanz, this would besufficient physical damage to establish a breach 
of Article 2(4).

- Strict liability within customary international law wouldsuggest a 
greater likelihood of violence of response, andarguably, so would a 
direct breach of custom, such as inter-fering with sovereignty. 
Interfering with sovereignty could beseen to produce spontaneous 
violent acts, such as forexample, in the Estonian removal of the 
statue of the BronzedRussian Soldier.

- In the light of the presented evidence, the suggestionarises that 
information operations inherent in cyber-attacks,just as in maneuver 
warfare, are essentially and necessarilyapriorito a kinetic 
consequence. his suggestion would meanthat there would be a 
preponderance of circumstances inwhich a cyber-attack by one state 
against another would be abreach of Article 2(4) of the UN Charter. 

- Also, even when acyber-attack did not breach Article 2(4) of the UN 
Charter,application to the United Nations Security Council forremedial 
action might produce action as if the cyber-attackwere indeed a 
breach.

- The information operations inherentin cyber-attacks are essentially 
and necessarilya priorito akinetic consequence

# {geib2012cyber}

- While the rules of thejus in belloare generally operative in 
cyberspace, it appears to be problematic toapply the fundamental 
principle of distinction because of the systemic interconnection of 
military and civi-lian infrastructure in the cyber realm.

-  In this regard, the application of the accepted legal definition of 
mili-tary objectives will make various components of the civilian 
cyber infrastructure a legitimate militaryobjective.

- . In order to avoid serious repercussions for the civilian 
population that might follow from thisinherent interconnectedness, 
different concepts are analysed that could provide potential solutions 
for aclearer separation of legitimate military targets and protected 
civilian installations and networks. 

- Cyberspace is opening up a new war-fighting domain: an artificial 
theatre of war, additional tothe natural theatres of land, air, sea 
and outer space

- Today, cyberspace has become hugelyimportant for the military, and 
there is little doubt that it will only grow in importance in 
thefuture

- A recent report by the US-China Economic and Security Review 
Commission concludesthat‘the Chinese People’s Liberation Army (PLA) 
has long considered the ability to seize infor-mation dominance as 
prerequisite for achieving victory in future high tech conflicts, but 
only recently has it begun to develop the capability to convert this 
strategic requirement into an oper-ational possibility’

- Against this background, today, there seems to be widespread 
consensus that‘there is no legalvacuum in cyberspace’. Certainly, as 
far as thejus in bellois concerned, this statementfindssupport in the 
Martens Clause, Article 36 of Additional Protocol I4and the Advisory 
Opinionof the International Court of Justice (ICJ) on the Legality of 
Nuclear Weapons.

- Against this back-ground, thus far, legal discussions have focused 
primarily on the question ofwhenthe laws ofwar are applicable in 
relation to military cyber operations.6First and foremost, this has 
been aline-drawing exercise–that is, a threshold debate concerning the 
question of when militarycyber operations rise to the level of an 
armed conflict or, once there is an armed conflict, whetherthey 
qualify as an‘attack’under the laws of war. These are fundamental 
questions given that onlyan armed conflict renders applicable the laws 
of war and given that–at least according to themajority opinion–only 
an‘attack’in the legal sense of Article 49 of Additional Protocol I 
isconstrained by the principles of distinction and proportionality.

- Much less attention, however, has been devoted to the question 
ofhowthese fundamentalhumanitarian law principles will work out in 
cyberspace. A recent report of the UnitedNations Secretary General 
speaks about‘new and unique challenges’in this regard.

- The specifictechnological characteristics and the sheer‘otherness’of 
cyberspace, compared to the naturaltheatres of warfare, raise the 
question whether the application of the established humanitarianlegal 
principles also adequately meets the specific humanitarian concerns of 
the cyber domainwhere military and civilian installations appear to be 
inherently interconnected. In particular,this technological set-up of 
cyberspace poses a challenge to the application of the principle 
ofdistinction

- Whereas it is technically possible to distinguish virtual targets in 
cyberspace–meaning that ahyper-distinctive attack against a military 
network is certainly realistic–the application of the accepted legal 
definition of military objectives in the interconnected cyber domain 
will renderbasically every cyber installation a legitimate military 
objective.

-  In cyberspace, every componentof the cyber infrastructure is a 
dual-use object. After all, by and large the military uses the 
verysame cyber infrastructure that is used for civilian 
purposes.10And, as is well known, all objectswhich by their use or 
intended future use make an effective contribution to military action 
legallyqualify as legitimate military targets, and therefore may be 
lawfully attacked in the course of anarmed conflict.11Evidently, this 
could have far reaching repercussions on the civilian population.

- Nevertheless, the problem has hardly been addressed at all that, 
because of the systemic techno-logical set-up of cyberspace in times 
of an armed conflict, basically every cyber installation–possibly even 
cyberspace as such–potentially qualifies as a military objective

- Unlike the natural theatres of war, the artificial domain of 
cyberspace is made up of physicalcomponents. Because of the systemic 
interconnectedness of networks and systems in cyberspaceand the fact 
that the military currently relies heavily on civilian cyber 
infrastructure to execute itscommunications and cyber operations, in 
times of an armed conflict, on the basis of the law as itcurrently 
stands, a wide range of essential components of the cyber 
infrastructure would legallyqualify as legitimate military objectives.

- Evidently, if systems which are civilian in nature and serve 
primarily important civilian inter-ests, such as economic and other 
societal functions, will nevertheless qualify as legitimate mili-tary 
objectives as a result of their dual use, this will the increase 
adverse impact on the civilianpopulation. Unfortunately, without 
further development of the law, there appears to be no com-pletely 
satisfactory solution to this problem.

- Of course, theoretically there are a number of sol-utions that could 
be drawn from the existing humanitarian legal framework, such as 
thecreation of digital safe havens in cyberspace, or attack exemptions 
regarding essential cyberinstallations and infrastructure components 
that may qualify as legitimate military objectivesbut serve civilian 
functions of the highest priority. A segregation of military and 
civilian net-works and cyber infrastructure would arguably best 
safeguard civilian interests and protection.However, while states are, 
of course, free to employ such measures, it appears that there is 
cur-rently no hard and fast legal obligation under the international 
humanitarian legal framework toadopt any of these solutions.

- Thus, while states will be under an obligation to adopt precautions 
in line with Articles 57 and58 of Additional Protocol I and their 
respective customary law pendants, for the time being theprinciple of 
proportionality is of crucial importance for the mitigation of adverse 
impact on thecivilian population

- In many instances cyber attackswill not lead to physical destruction 
but to the loss or degradation of the targeted object’s 
func-tionality, be it a central server or an electric power plant. 

# {buchan2016cyber}

- However, asthis discussion has progressed it has become apparent 
that international humanitarianlaw was formulated long before the 
potential for cyber warfare was contemplated andtherefore provides a 
generally unsatisfactory legal framework that does not adequatelytake 
into account the unique features of cyberspace and the potential for 
this domainto be exploited for warlike purposes.

- It goes without saying that if international hu-manitarian law is to 
retain its legitimacy and credibility – put differently, that 
interna-tional humanitarian law is to continue to attract compliance – 
it must keep apacewith technological developments.

- As cyberspace becomes ever more integrated into our daily lives and 
emerges asa more prominent means and method of warfare, we can expect 
to see states agitate infavour of reform of international humanitarian 
law – whether it be through the adop-tion of cyber-specific 
international agreements or state practice more generally – toensure 
that it is able to more effectively address cyber conflict. The 
Tallinn Manual’sprogressive approach to applying international 
humanitarian law to cyber conflict islikely to act as a lightning rod 
around which future developments will converge.

# {o2012cyber}

- the USmilitary today has the largest concentration of expertise and 
legal authority withrespect to cyberspace

- . Those in the legal community who support this develop-ment  are  
divided  as  to  the  appropriate  legal  rules  to  guide  the  
military  in  itsoversight  of  the  Internet.  Specialists  on  the  
international  law  on  the  use  offorce  argue  that  with  analogy  
and  interpretation,  current  international  law  canbe applied in a 
way that allows great freedom without sending the message thatthe  USA 
 is  acting  lawlessly  when  it  comes  to  the  Internet.  Others  
reject  thisargument as unnecessary and potentially too restrictive. 
The USA need not ob-serve international law rules, especially not with 
respect to the Internet. 

- ‘Cyber’  is  one  of  the  most  frequently  used  terms  in  
international  security  dis-cussions  today.  

- It is not a new term in international law. Internationallawyers  
have  been  discussing  computers  and  the  law  governing  their  
use  forseveral  decades.1For specialists  in the area of 
international  law on the  use of force, however, certain developments 
since at least 2007 have pushed the termand what it stands for to a 
top position on their agendas.

- In 2007, Estonia experienced extensive computer hacking attacks that 
lastedseveral weeks.3Since then, support has been growing to give 
priority to militarysolutions to cyber security concerns. Soon after 
the attacks on Estonia, NATO4began developing policies and capacity 
aimed at cyber security.5In 2008, duringthe   brief   Georgia–Russia   
War   over   South   Ossetia,   Georgia   experiencedcyber-attacks  
similar  to  those  suffered  by  Estonia  in  the  previous  
year.6In2009,  the  USA  began  releasing  a  number  of  policies  on 
 cyber  security  thatwere   predominantly   military   in   
orientation.7More   tangibly,   the   USAannounced  in  2009  that  it 
 would  establish  Cyber  Command  as  a  subunit  ofStrategic    
Command,    one    of    its    nine    combat    commands,    within  
  theDepartment  of  Defense.8Also,  in  2009,  computer  malware,  
known  as  theStuxnet  worm,  was  released  apparently  by  one  or  
more  governments,  mostlikely  the  USA  and  Israel,  to  slow  the  
progress  of  Iran’s  nuclear  program,  aproblem otherwise being 
addressed by the Security Council and through nego-tiations [...] In 
2011, the USA Congress began debat-ing new legislation that would give 
even more authority to the Department ofDefense  for  cyber  security, 
 at  the  expense  of  the  Department  of  HomelandSecurity (DHS).

- Within  the  debate  over  security  in  cyberspace,  it  should  be 
 recognized  as  apreliminary  matter  that  cyber  space  is  
international  space.  Activity  in  cyber-space and domestic 
legislation with respect to it must comply with the 
relevantinternational law.

- Some looking to the military to defend cyberspace are seekingto 
exclude considerations of international law either because they are 
interna-tional law sceptics in general or they believe international 
law cannot be appliedto the Internet as a practical matter. Stewart 
Baker, a Washington DC lawyerwho  was an Assistant Secretary  for 
Policy  and Technology in the  DHS  in theBush administration, 
dismisses international law in general and its role in cybersecurity  
in  particular.

- Other scholars who apparently understand that international law is 
generallythe relevant law for cyber security questions may still argue 
that it is difficult tofit cyber problems into the rules on 
international law with respect to the use offorce.

- Peter  Singer,  Noah  Schachtman,  John  Mueller  and  other  
security  analysts,however, argue that the threat of cyber-attacks has 
been blown out of propor-tion to the detriment of preventing the real 
challenges to cyber security: cyber-crime and espionage.16Singer and 
Schachtman argue that rather than drawingfrom  nuclear  deterrence  
thinking,  the  better  analogy  is  to  maritime  piracy.17Piracy is 
a costly and sometimes deadly problem, but is being addressed 
throughlaw enforcement methods, which are sometimes carried out by the 
military, butthe FBI and other national police agencies are active in 
the effort to stop Somalipiracy. 

- Another apt analogy is to the chemical sector. Chemicals are an 
indis-pensable  part  of  everyday  life  in  the  21st  century,  but 
 chemicals  can  also  bemade  into  devastating  weapons  of  mass  
destruction.  To  prevent  this,  theChemical  Weapons  Convention  
prohibits  the  use  and  possession  of  chemicalweapons.18The  CWC  
is  monitored  by  Organization  for  the  Prohibition  onChemical  
Weapons  (OPCW),  as  well  as  national  defence  ministries.  
Primaryregulation and oversight of the chemical sector, however, is by 
civil authoritiesand   such   international   organizations   as   the 
  United   Nations   EnvironmentProgram

- Theevidence shows that the USA, in particular, is building capacity 
and developingstrategies that make the Department of Defense a major 
player in Internet useand  protection.  The  concern  with  this  
development  is  that  the  Pentagon  willconceive of cyber space as 
it does conventional space, with war fighting in mind.

- Yet,  the  international  legal  rules  on  the  use  of  force,  
especially  the  rules  onself-defence, raise important barriers to 
military solutions to cyber space prob-lems.

- Even if some cyber incidents could fit a solid definition of 
whatconstitutes an armed attack, responding to such an attack will 
rarely be lawful orprudent if the response is a use of force. 

- In  the  USA  and  other States  where  the  thinking  is  in  
conventional  militaryterms  respecting  responses  to  cyber  
problems,  the  advocates  of  such  thinkingappear to be trapped by 
an ideology of militarism. The vast majority of cybersecurity 
incidents are carried out not by government-sponsored hackers 
causingdeaths  and  brick  and  mortar  destruction.  The  major  
challenge  to  Internetsecurity  is  by  private  criminals  
interested  in  private  gain.  International  lawsupports cyber 
security that is achieved through law enforcement 
cooperation,supported by shared legal norms governing the use of the 
Internet.

- To date, the problem of Internet security has been the domain of 
internationallaw scholars with expertise in use of force questions. 
They have sent the messagethat the Internet may be protected through 
military force or the threat of mili-tary  force,  analogizing  to  
Cold  War  deterrence  strategy.  Governments  havefollowed  this  
modelling,  pouring  resources  into  the  military  for  keeping  
theInternet  safe  and  for  taking  advantage  of  what  it  offers  
to  attack  opponents.Doing so has required strained analogies of 
cyber-attacks to conventional kin-etic attacks. The Internet is now 
far less secure than before there was a CyberCommand  or  a  NATO  
CCDCOE.  

# {pagallo2015cyber}

- The use of cyber force can be as severe and disruptive as 
traditional armedattacks are. Cyber attacks may neither provoke 
physical injuries nor cause propertydamages and still, they can affect 
essential functions of today’s societies, such asgovernmental 
services, business processes or communication systems that 
progressive-ly depend on information as a vital resource.

- Whereas several scholars claim that aninternational treaty, much as 
new forms of international cooperation, are necessary, afurther 
challenge should be stressed: authors of cyber attacks can be 
non-state actors,and identifying the party responsible for such a use 
of force, whether non-state actors ornational sovereign states, is 
often impossible

- Accordingly, several programmes ononline security and national 
defence have been developed by sovereign states to tacklethis menace 
and yet, the endurance of Western democracies and their aim to 
protectbasic rights have already been tested by such programmes over 
the past years. The newscenarios of cyber force do not only concern 
the field of international law, since theymay represent the main 
threat in the fields of national and constitutional law as well

- Here, we should take into account a basic fact:whereas, over the 
past centuries, humansocieties have used information andcommunication 
technology (ICT), but have been mainly dependent on technol-ogies that 
revolve around energy and basic resources, today’s societies 
areincreasingly dependent on ICT and, furthermore, on information as a 
vitalresource. Essential functions of today’s societies, such as 
governmental services,transportation and communication systems, 
business processes or energy pro-duction and distribution networks, 
depend on the use of computer platforms.

- Face-to-face with the benefits of this profound transformation, such 
ICT-dependency entails however its own risks, because“the near 
absolute depen-dence of critical infrastructure on cyberspace looms 
particularly large as asecurity concern”(Schmitt2014, p. 273). 
Consequently, scholars have focusedon a new class of aggressions, 
dubbed as informational attacks or cyber attacks,conceived as“any 
action taken to undermine the function of a computernetwork for a 
political or national security purpose”(Hathaway et al.2012,p. 826).

-  typical illustration is given by the distributed 
denial-of-service(DDOS)-attacks against both the Republic of Estonia 
in April 2007 and Georgiain summer 2008, which interrupted, or 
paralyzed, some critical services andinfrastructures of those 
countries

- Further forms of digital assaults comprise thesyntactic and semantic 
attacks: in the former case, the aim is to infect acomputer’s 
operating system through viruses, worms and Trojan horses, 
namelyprograms that aim to produce the malfunctioning of a computer 
network. In thecase of semantic attacks, the purpose is either to 
insert inaccurate informationin the computer system, or to modify 
correct information processed by suchsystem, so that computers seem to 
workproperly, even as they malfunction(Libicki1995). As a result, how 
then, and to what extent, do such attacksaffect current LOW and IHL?

- Some forms of informational aggression can be a means for real-world 
operations.For instance, in the words of the former US Secretary of 
Defence, Leon Panetta, bypenetrating another nation’s networks and 
computers“an aggressor nation...couldderail passenger trains, 
contaminate the water supply in major cities, or shut down thepower 
grid across large parts of the country”. Hence, it seems that the 
impact of an informational attack on real-world targets can be 
properly addressed with the current provisions of LOW and IHL, either 
directly or bythe use of analogy, in accordance with the remarks of 
Philip Alston in the 2010 Reportto the UN General Assembly on 
extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions.

- As theUN Special Rapporteur affirms,“a missile fired from a drone is 
no differentfrom any other commonly used weapon...The critical legal 
question is thesame for each weapon: whether its specific use complies 
with IHL”(Alston2010, § 79). However, things can be trickier both in 
the case of informationalforms of aggression that precede, or prepare, 
a conventional physical assault,and in the case of informational 
attacks that do not entail any physicalviolence, for they aim to 
remove or annihilate informational resources fromcyberspace or delete 
them without backup.

-  The more we deal withICT-driven societies, i.e. societies that 
depend on information as a vital resource, themore it is likely that 
even strict informational attacks can force states to desist from—orto 
engage in—a particular course of action.

- Although such attacks neither provokephysical injuries nor cause 
property damages, they do affect essential functions oftoday’s 
societies, such as governmental services, business processes or 
communicationsystems.

- Admittedly, by examining the new scenarios and challenges of cyber 
warfarein connection with the severity of strict informational 
attacks, no one-size-fits-allanswer can properly tackle the complexity 
of the subject matter and moreover,some critical issues are fated to 
remain open in the legal field. This is why, asstressed above in 
Section 3, several scholars claim that an international treaty,much as 
new forms of international cooperation, are necessary

# {buchan2012cyber}

- The legality of cyber attacks is generally approached from the use 
of force pro-hibition contained in Article 2(4) UN Charter. In order 
to constitute an unlawfuluse  of  force  it  is  widely  accepted  
that  an  intervention  must  produce  physicaldamage. Of course, a 
cyber attack can cause physical damage and therefore vio-late Article 
2(4). Upon the available evidence, I submit that the deployment ofthe 
Stuxnet virus against Iran in 2010 is such an example. 

-  However, the issue isthat many cyber attacks do not manifest 
physical damage and are thus not cap-tured by Article 2(4). Contrary 
to claims in existing cyber war literature, this doesnot mean that 
such attacks are lawful.

- Since the dawn of the ‘Information Age’1States have become highly 
dependentupon the use of computer technology in order to effectively 
regulate their socie-ties.2However, as recent events have illustrated, 
hostile actors have recognizedthis  dependency  and  have  
increasingly  sought  to  attack  computer  servers  andthe 
information that they hold. Such operations are known as cyber 
attacks.

- Given both the inherent hostilityof  cyber  attacks  and  their  
ability  to  generate  grave  destructive  effects,  it  is perhaps  
unsurprising  that  cyber  attacks  have  been  generally  approached  
fromthe perspective of thejus ad bellum;5specifically, can cyber 
attacks be regardedas an unlawful use of force according to Article 
2(4) of the United Nations (UN)Charter?

- This  has  proven  to  be  a  difficult  question  for  the  
international  lawyer  toanswer because of the variety of different 
consequences that cyber attacks canproduce.7On the one hand, cyber 
attacks can cause physical damage compar-able  to  an  attack  by  
conventional  weapons.  For  example,  a  cyber  attack  candisable an 
air traffic control system and cause planes to crash or can 
interferewith and corrupt the  operating system  of a power station 
and cause a nuclearmeltdown. On the other hand, cyber attacks may not 
cause any physical damage.Examples include cyber attacks that cause 
key government websites to crash orthat destroy or manipulate 
important information located on computer servers.

- Importantly, and as we shall see, Article 2(4) is an effects-based 
prohibition.The  generally  accepted  interpretation  of  Article  
2(4)  is  that  only  those  inter-ventions that produce physical 
damage will be regarded as an unlawful use offorce. Consequently, 
according to positive international law those cyber attacksthat  do  
not produce  physical  damage  will not  constitute a violation  of 
Article2(4)

- Commentators have therefore suggested that these types of cyber 
attacksfall outside of the international regulatory framework and 
there are thus ‘scantlegal impediments to launching the computer wars 
of tomorrow’

- The  argument  runs  that  the  UN  Charter  was  established  in  
the  immediateaftermath of the Second World War when the main threat 
to international peace and  security  was  represented  by  
professional  armies  employing  conventionalweapons.  Article  2(4)  
was  therefore  devised  in  order  to  address  this  type  offorce.  
 Quite   clearly,   Article   2(4)   was   never   intended   to   
address   attacksagainst  computer  systems  or  the  information  
resident  on  them.  Article  2(4)  isthus considered anachronistic 
and demonstrates an ‘inability’10to protect statesfrom new methods of 
warfare like cyber attacks that do not manifest physicaldamage.

- However, this reality has caused considerable concernwithin  cyber  
war  scholarship,  with  commentators  pointing  out  that  in  
theInformation  Age  an  attack  against  computers  servers  or  
information  locatedon   them   can   be   just   as   destructive   
as   an   attack   that   produces   physicaldamage. Examples usually 
offered in this context are cyber attacks that disablea State’s 
military defence network or cripple its financial sector.

- Proposed reforms generally fall into one of two categories.15The 
conventionalproposal  is  that  Article  2(4)  needs  to  be  subject  
to  an  ‘interpretive  reorienta-tion’,16dilating  its  scope  in  
order  to  encompass  cyber  attacks  which,  althoughnot producing 
physical damage, nevertheless have a destructive 
impact.17Morerecently,  there  have  been  sustained  calls  that  a  
‘new,  comprehensive  legal framework is needed to address cyber 
attacks’.18In particular the call has beenfor an international treaty, 
similar to the Outer Space Treaty 1967 or the UNConvention on Law of 
the Sea 1982, which would regulate the use of computertechnology and, 
specifically, prohibit hostile attacks against computer servers orthe 
information resident on them.

- This being said, however, dilation of the term ‘force’ within 
Article 2(4) eitherby way of treaty reform or state practice20is 
unlikely. No reform to the text ofthe  UN  Charter  has  ever  been  
agreed  and  State  practice  in  the  context  ofapplying Article 
2(4) to cyber attacks is far from consistent.21At least anytimesoon, 
the agreement and implementation of an international treaty also 
seemsunlikely.

- This  notwithstanding,  the  purpose  of  this  article  is  to  
argue  thatcontrary  to  existing  claims  the  current  international 
 legal  frameworkdoes notrender state security as vulnerable to cyber 
attacks as contemporary cyber warscholarship  would  have  us  
believe.  Sure,  cyber  attacks  that  do  not  producephysical  
damage  do  not  fall  within  the  Article  2(4)  prohibition.  
However,  Iargue  that  such  cyber  attacks  are  nevertheless  
regulated  by  international  law.Specifically, I submit that such 
attacks can still be regarded as unlawful on thebasis of the principle 
of non-intervention that is ‘part and parcel’ of 
customaryinternational law.

- Sure,  a  cyber  attack  that  producesphysical  damage  will  
amount  to  a  violation  of  Article  2(4).  A  good  exampleof  this 
 is  the  cyber  attack  against  Iran  in  2010.  Although  there  
are  questionsover  the  exact  impact  of  the  Stuxnet  virus,  the  
general  consensus  is  that  thecomputer virus physically destroyed 
centrifuges at Natanz nuclear facility. Suchphysical  damage  would  
bring  this  attack  within  the  prohibition  contained  inArticle 
2(4).

- However, it is perfectly conceivable that a cyber attack will not 
produce phys-ical damage and thus will not violate Article 2(4). 
Contrary to claims in existingscholarship,  this  does  not  mean  
that  such  attacks  are  necessarily  lawful.  Theobjective of this 
article has been to reveal that cyber attacks that do not 
producephysical  damage  but  do  yield  damaging  effects  may  still 
 fall  foul  of  thenon-intervention principle. As I have argued, a 
cyber attack will constitute anunlawful  intervention  under  
customary  international  law  where  it  can  be  re-garded  as  the  
intentional  application  of  coercion  against  a  State  in  
relationto  a  matter  that  it  is  freely  entitled  to  determine.  
I  submit  that  the  cyberattacks against Estonia in 2007 provide a 
good example of cyber attacks amount-ing  to  an  unlawful  
intervention.  It  is  thus  apparent  that  the  principle  
ofnon-intervention represents a powerful (albeit often unrecognized) 
internationallegal tool that can be used by States in order to protect 
them from coercive cyberattacks.

# {allenby2014new}

- Throughout history, new military technologies have had profound 
ramifications: The rise of gunpowder andcannon created economies of 
scale that encouraged the emergence of nation-states, and Prussia used 
railroadsto surprise the Austrians at Ko¬niggra¬tz, beginning the end 
of the Austrian Empire

- It is highly unlikely that the dramaticimpacts of emerging military 
technolo-gies and changing institutional and geo-political  contexts  
render  the  laws  ofwarÑas a body of law, institutions, 
andpracticesÑobsolete. 

-  The laws ofwar  constitute  a  body  of  formal  andinformal law, 
norms, and practices thathave been developed over a long period,with 
commentary and input from manycultures. It is neither desirable nor 
likelythat such a robust and developed frame-work  should  suddenly  
become  totallyobsolete. 

# {hughes2010treaty}

- ‘The next war will begin in cyberspace.’ Those are the words of the 
nominee to lead the first United States Cyber-Command (USCYBERCOM).1 
Inside a nondescript building adjacent to the National Security Agency 
headquarters in Maryland, a small team under the direction of the 
Secretary of Defense has been working quietly to establish the world’s 
first cyberspace command. Although its strategic objectives remain 
classified, its mission is clear: to ensure continued US primacy in 
cyberspace

- As cyberspace becomes what military strategists and futurists call 
the ‘next battlespace’, the world may indeed be witnessing not only 
the rise of a new zone of strategic competition but, more 
consequentially, ground zero for the next global arms race. Although 
cyber-warfare is still in its infancy, a new generation of 
cyber-weaponry and cyber-warriors promises to reshape how war is waged 
in the early twenty-first century.

- While the electromagnetic spectrum is not an entirely new zone of 
conflict, disruptive innovations and human dependence on machines make 
online targets increasingly attractive for states seeking to achieve 
greater impact at lower cost. This is especially true for small 
countries looking to gain an asymmetric edge on the 
twenty-first-century battlefield

- The United States, still the world’s pre-eminent military 
superpower, is not the only nation preparing to fight the ‘next war’ 
in cyberspace. By the start of 2010 China, India, and Russia alongside 
the US, the UK and South Korea are among the first group of countries 
to establish formal command and control (C2) over military assets in 
the cyber-domain.

- In addition, a host of non-state actors are engaged in 
cyber-warfare. Al-Qaeda, Hezbollah, Hamas, Zapatistas and a variety of 
‘patriotic’ hacker-attackers are just some of the known paramilitary, 
resistance or revolutionary groups that have used cyber-warfare or 
plan to engage in it, with or without specific state sanction. 

- As numerous media accounts have attested, even a teenager armed 
with a consumer PC and a broadband connection can wreak havoc on both 
business and govern-ment organizations in cyberspace, as demonstrated 
in 1999 by teenage British hackers who altered British military secure 
satellite orbits and as reported early in 2008 a teenager in Poland 
who basically turned the Lodz ‘tram system into his own personal train 
set’

- While the first all-out cyber-war has yet to be waged, cyber-experts 
and military strategists anticipate that a major interstate 
cyber-battle could be fought within the next few years

- Most worrisome from an international affairs perspec-tive is the 
feeble system of regulation and governance that currently pertains to 
this emergent threat. As global society becomes ever more dependent on 
cyber-space for both its most basic and its most critical functions, 
the economic and social impact from a full-scale cyber-attack could 
cripple a modern networked state.

- More importantly, General Kevin Chilton of the US Strategic Command 
(USSTRATCOM) is representative of many military leaders in believing 
that a major cyber-attack on an advanced information economy could 
spur a substantial conventional or in some cases even a nuclear 
response.7 He maintains that national strategists would not want to 
‘take any response options off the table’ during a battle in the 
cyber-domain

- For the purposes of this article, the term ‘cyber-warfare’ is used 
to indicate broadly any warfare waged by states and significant 
non-state actors in cyberspace. It can include defending information 
and communications systems, critical infrastructure, weapons systems 
or military command centres from attack, as well as conducting 
equivalent offensive opera-tions against an adversary. It does not 
refer to recreational or socially motivated hacking or ‘hacktivism’

- As this article has attempted to show, rightly or wrongly cyberspace 
has indeed become the fifth battlespace. While much of the early 
thinking defining cyber-space as a war domain was carried out in the 
US during the final years of the Cold War, other leading cyber-powers 
have embraced this notion and are in the process of creating credible 
military capabilities for waging counter-attacks or offensive war in 
cyberspace. It is now up to international society to determine how 
best to regulate warfare or hostilities in this fifth battlespace.

- While some weapons have been hailed over the years as means to 
reduce casualties, few have made similar claims about cyber-arms. The 
truth is that no one truly knows what long-term impact information 
weapons will have in the practice of state aggression or declared war.

- Unlike warfare in the other four domains, thus far cyber-war is both 
relatively cheap and readily available, making it all the more 
alluring for small states and non-state actors to deploy their weapons 
of technological knowledge, information and skill. 

- States, for their part, are fully capable of quietly exploiting the 
skills of hackers or so-called patriotic cyber-warriors. Cyber-warfare 
is also attractive as a means of circumventing the laws of war 
governing conventional arms. Therefore, it is imperative that 
interna-tional society consider how classic war principles can guide a 
new cyber-warfare regime

- While there is no guarantee that a cyber-treaty will prevent the 
digital equiva-lent of Pearl Harbor, the Blitz, Hiroshima or 9/11, the 
complete absence of any meaningful regulation or treaty infrastructure 
leaves the way open for a digital ‘war against all’. Correcting this 
imbalance will take a concerted effort on the part of international 
society, especially the United States and the other 
cyber-powers—China, Russia, India and Japan. In the near term they 
could well look to the member states of the EU, middle powers like 
Israel, and South Korea, as well as NATO and other international 
military alliances, for assistance in shaping a new regime

# {pipyros2018new}

- In the 21st century, cyberspace is the new frontier, a new worldfull 
of possibilities to help advance prosperity. Cyberspace andthe rapid 
development of Information and CommunicationTechnologies (ICTs) have 
fundamentally transformed the global economy and the way of life by 
providing billions of peopleacross  the  world  with  instant  access  
to  information, tocommunication and to new economic opportunites

- At thesame time, national security, education, government, 
health,public safety, as well as sectors such as energy, 
transporta-tion and communication are closely related to, if not 
dependenton, cyberspace and updated ICTs. The more the 
systems, infrastructures, societies and economies are becoming 
inde-pendent the higher their vulnerability and the complexity todeal 
with new risks and treats that menace the sovereigntyof States and 
the well-being of societies and citizens

-  The increas-ing number of cyber-attacks on States’ Critical 
InformationInfrastructure (CII) are transforming cyberspace also into 
abattlefield, “the mouse and keyboard being the new weapons”and 
bringing out “cyber warfare” as the “5th dimension of war"

- The wide range of cyber-attacks against Estonia’s criticalICT’s in 
2007, following the country’s spat with Russia over theremoval of a 
war memorial, were the first large scale attacksthat were meant to 
harm the functionality of the State andto cause a number of adverse 
effects on the operation of publicadministration and the economy. The 
specific assault quicklyled  to  the  cultivation  of  fear  among  
citizens  and  to  thedestabilisation of the country’s financial 
system, threateningEstonia’s national security

-  A smaller range of cyber operations followed, such as 
thecyber-attacks against Georgia (June 2008), Lithuania (August2008), 
Kazakhstan (January 2009) and Ukraine (March and May2014

-  Meanwhile, Advanced Persistent Threats (APT) (Virvilisand 
Gritzalis, 2013a) clearly demonstrate the fact that cyberwarfare is an 
increasingly alarming phenomenon. Examplesof such include “Ghostnet” 
(Kassner, 2009), a large-scale cyberspying operation against the US; 
“Operation Aurora” (Zetter,2010), a targeted malware attack against at 
least 30 major UScompanies – including Google and Adobe; “Stuxnet” 
(Farwelland Rohozinski, 2011), a zero-day malware leading to a 
sabo-tage against Iran’s nuclear program; and “DarkSeoul” (Virvilisand 
Gritzalis, 2013b), a sophisticated malware that attackedSouth Korean 
financial institutions and the Korean broad-caster YTN (Sang-Hun, 201

- In order to defend USA from cyber-attacks former US Presi-dent Obama 
declared America’s digital infrastructure a strategicnational asset 
(The Economist, 2010). Such decisions reflect theneed to address the 
challenges posed with regard to cyber-attacks  that  could  be  
qualified  as  cyberwar  actions. Thecontinuous increase in both the 
number and the intensity ofcyber-attacks on States’ CII renders the 
research on definingand evaluating these categories of cyber-attacks 
into a press-ing need

- A first range of questions relate to the adequacy and suit-ability 
of the existing “old” – developed over generations to beapplied on 
attacks using kinetic weapons and armed vio-lence – and the 
terminology used (such as force and aggression)to control “the brave 
new world of cyber warfare

- The difficulties to define andto identify the effects and impacts 
of a cyber-attack in orderto be equated to an “armed attack” are 
obvious: if in the “tra-ditional”jus ad bellumframework emphasis is 
given on humanand/or material destruction, authors are arguing also 
for “un-availability” of CII as equivalent criteria

- Despite the progress made on regulation and research level toaddress 
the issues raised, there are still significant gaps in reach-ing a 
safe and definitive approach on when a cyber-attackconstitutes “use of 
force” when the right to self-defence shouldbe recognized

- Because the UN Charter prohibits the unau-thorized “use of force”, a 
State must be able to quickly andsafely assess whether a cyber 
operation constitutes a “use offorce”  triggering  the  international  
condemnation  and  eco-nomic sanctions, (active) “cyber self-defense” 
– or an “armedattack” (with  the  use  of  conventional  military  
weapons)  asforceful response

- This is primarily achieved by adopting the “effects-based”or 
“consequences-based” approach, which focuses on the overalleffect of a 
cyber operation to the victim-State, as well as byusing the 
qualitative criteria for recognising the impact of cyber-attacks as 
proposed by the International Group of Experts inthe Manual of the 
International Law applicable to Cyber warfare(Tallinn Manual)

- jus ad bellum, that bodyof international law that governs a State’s 
resort to force asan instrument of its national polic

- We have adopted the“effects-based” or “consequences-based” 
approach, whichfocuses on the overall effect of a cyber operation to 
the victim-State, as well as by using the qualitative criteria for 
recognisingthe impact of cyber-attacks as proposed by the 
InternationalGroup of Experts in the Manual of the International Law 
ap-plicable to cyber warfare

- In other words, the categorisation of the type ofattack lies 
heavily on its impact level both in terms of the lossof human lives 
and in terms of the destruction of critical in-frastructures. 
Consequently, the degree of the immediate as wellas of the long-term 
effects of a cyber-attack constitutes a criti-cal factor for its 
categorisation. Furthermore, the greater the degreeof impact of a 
cyber-attack, the greater the chances are that itwill be characterised 
as “use of force”, or even worse, as “armedattack” when its magnitude 
is so great as to cause loss of humanlives. Thus, the main issue of 
investigation is to define the methodof measurability of the impact of 
a cyber-attack

- Despite the constructive contribution of the “Tallinn Manual”,the 
international legal regime is lagging behind the problemsto deal with. 
The existing norms do not offer a comprehen-sive legal framework in 
the way that States can shape policyto  the  threat  of  hostile  
cyber  operations.  Furthermore,  theuse  of  interpretative  methods  
such  as  analogies  and  teleo-logical and systematic understanding 
is lacking the necessarylegal  safety.  Additionally,  state  practice 
 is  lacking  incharacterising  a  cyber  operation  as  a  “use  of  
force” or  not.However,  for  the  sake  of  multiple  safety  
decision  makingwith regard to respond to a cyber attack has to be 
based oncommonly  accepted  principles  and  pre-existing  norms. 
As-sessing the feasibility, legitimisation and legality of responsesof 
cyber-attacks, equivalent to armed attacks, seems to remainto  a  
large  extent “a  matter  of  speculation  and  hypotheticalreasoning 
(Kessler and Werner, 2013). Therefore, the system-atic  modelling  
methodology  could  be  used  as  a  “legalinterpretation  tool”  in  
areas  where  there  is  uncertainty  ordisagreement in multiple legal 
analyses and for providing aframework for evaluating differences in 
interpretation of thelaw.

- The threshold of a “use of force” must be balanced betweenon the one 
hand State’s willingness to avoid any harmful con-sequences caused by 
the actions of others States and one theother hand its motivation to 
preserve their freedom of action.The evaluation criteria proposed by 
the International Groupof Experts in the Tallinn Manual seek to 
balance these con-flicting objectives through consideratio

# {whetham2016we}

- In a time when the clear dividing lines between war and peace are 
challenged by newtechniques and methods of conducting hostilities, it 
is often difficult to tell if one is ina state of war or not. Even 
states that do not consider themselves to be ‘at war’ findthemselves 
living under heightened security, with attacks on citizens, economic 
infra-structure, or way of life being a constant theme. 

- The Just War Tradition has provided a framework for thinking about 
warfarefor well over 2,000 years. While the exact details may vary a 
little, the core ideas areshared across religious and secular culture, 
underpinning international law. 

- The Just War Tradition, in the West at least, developed out of a 
synthesis of classicalGreco-Roman and later Christian values, although 
it would be a mistake to considerit as a purely Western or even as a 
religious phenomenon.4The tradition guides nor-mative thinking about 
what is and what is not acceptable, even in times of war. Itscore 
ideas—that there should be limits on when the use of force can be 
consideredlegitimate (thejus  ad  bellum), and that there should also 
be limits on what andwhom that force can be directed against (thejus 
in bello)—have found expression inall societies due to the recognition 
that they need to restrain the wars they fight insome way.5While the 
exact details may vary a little, the core ideas are shared 
acrossreligious and secular culture, underpinning international law. 
The ubiquitous natureof the thinking found in the Just War Tradition 
therefore represents something of “acommon language for discussing and 
debating the rights and wrongs of conflict.”6When those norms are 
violated, those violations are, generally speaking, recognisedand 
condemned as such.

- The character ofconflict appears to be morphing in other ways, too. 
Robert Gates, U.S. Secretary ofDefense, described the problem when he 
articulated, “the categories of warfare areblurring and no longer fit 
into neat, tidy boxes. One can expect to see more toolsand tactics of 
destruction—from the sophisticated to the simple—being 
employedsimultaneously in hybrid and more complex forms of warfare.”

# {boer2015echoes}

- The  debate  on  the  (in)applicability  of  Article  2(4)  to  
cyber  attacks  shows  at-tempts to apply the 1945 prohibition to a 
21st-century phenomenon.

- Article2(4) includes the use of minor military force, the use of 
biological and chemicalweapons as well as non-military physical force, 
yet excludes economic coercionand, possibly, minor cyber attacks

- The application of existing rules ischallenging, the Editorial 
argued, as ‘the relevant rules have been developed fordifferent  types 
 of  situations  or  events,  whereas  cyber  security  involves  
manyadditional complicating factors...’

- One of the ensuing questions is whether acyber attack can violate 
the prohibition on the use of force.